---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/jethro-s-working-notes/robbins-gout/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


# $ Robbins: Gout

Created: November 1, 2022 9:28 AM
Updated: November 1, 2022 9:31 AM

## Gout

**Gout is marked by transient attacks of acute arthritis initiated by monosodium urate crystals deposited within and around joints.** Whether gout is primary or secondary to another underlying disease ( [Table 26.6](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/t0030) ), the common feature is excessive uric acid in the tissues and body fluids. In the primary form (90% of cases), gout is the major manifestation of the disease; the cause is unknown.

Table 26.6

Classification of Gout

| Clinical Category | Uric Acid Production | Uric Acid Excretion |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Primary Gout (90%) |  |  |
| Unknown enzyme defects (85%–90%) | Normal↑ | ↓Normal |
| Known enzyme defects (e.g., partial HGPRT deficiency) | ↑ | Normal |
| Secondary Gout (10%) |  |  |
| Increased nucleic acid turnover (e.g., leukemia) | ↑↑ | ↑ |
| Chronic renal disease | Normal | ↓ |
| Congenital (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, HGPRT deficiency) | ↑↑ | ↑ |

*HGPRT,* Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase.

## Pathogenesis

**Hyperuricemia (plasma urate above 6.8 mg/dL) is necessary, but not sufficient, for development of gout.** Elevated uric acid can result from overproduction, reduced excretion, or both ( [Table 26.6](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/t0030) ). Uric acid levels are determined by several factors:

- *Uric acid production.* Urate synthesis is the end product of purine catabolism. Purines are themselves the product of two interlinked pathways: the de novo pathway, in which purine nucleotides are synthesized from nonpurine precursors, and the salvage pathways, in which nucleotides are synthesized from free purine bases in the diet and those generated by purine nucleotide catabolism.
- *Uric acid excretion.* In the kidney, uric acid is filtered by the glomerulus, but is almost completely resorbed by the proximal tubule. The small fraction of total uric acid in the urine is the result of secretion in the distal nephron.

Asymptomatic hyperuricemia appears around puberty in males and after menopause in females. In primary gout, hyperuricemia is usually due to reduced excretion. The mechanism is not known, but genome-wide association studies have identified polymorphisms in genes including *URAT1, GLUT9,* and *KCNQ1,* which are involved in transport and homeostasis of urate and other ions. A small fraction of primary gout cases are caused by uric acid overproduction due to identifiable enzymatic defects. For example, partial deficiency of hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT) interrupts the salvage pathway, so purine metabolites cannot be salvaged and are, instead, degraded into uric acid. Complete absence of HGPRT also results in hyperuricemia, but the significant neurologic manifestations of this condition *(Lesch-Nyhan syndrome)* dominate the clinical picture, which is therefore classified as secondary gout. Secondary gout can also be caused by increased production (e.g., rapid cell lysis during chemotherapy for leukemia) or decreased excretion (chronic renal disease).

Inflammation is triggered by precipitation of monosodium urate crystals into the joints, which result in the production of cytokines that recruit leukocytes ( [Fig. 26.46](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0245) ). Macrophages and neutrophils phagocytose the urate crystals. This activates the inflammasome ( [Chapter 3](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/#!/content/3-s2.0-B9780323531139000030?scrollTo=%23c00003) ) and leads to the secretion of cytokines, including IL-1, which promote accumulation of more neutrophils and macrophages within the joint. A vicious cycle develops as newly recruited inflammatory cells release cytokines, free radicals, proteases, and arachidonic acid metabolites to recruit even more leukocytes. Complement activation by the alternative pathway may also contribute to leukocyte recruitment. Rupture of phagolysosomes induced by ingested urate crystals can cause further release of proteases and inflammatory mediators. The resulting acute arthritis typically remits spontaneously in days to weeks. Repeated attacks of acute arthritis lead eventually to the formation of *tophi,* aggregates of urate crystals and inflammatory tissue in the inflamed synovial membrane and periarticular tissue as well as severe cartilage damage that compromises joint function.


<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





# Untitled

Created: August 28, 2022 9:50 PM
Updated: August 28, 2022 9:50 PM

</div></div>


Open full size imageFigure 26.46Pathogenesis of acute gouty arthritis. Urate crystals are phagocytosed by macrophages and stimulate the production of various inflammatory mediators that elicit the inflammation characteristic of gout. Note that IL-1 stimulates the production of chemokines and other cytokines from a variety of cells. *LTB4,* Leukotriene B4.

Only about 10% of individuals with hyperuricemia develop gout. Other factors linked to disease include the following:

- Age of the individual and duration of the hyperuricemia, as gout usually appears after 20 to 30 years of hyperuricemia
- Male sex
- Genetic predisposition, including X-linked *HGPRT* abnormalities and primary gout, which has a multigenic pattern of inheritance
- Alcohol consumption
- Obesity
- Drugs (e.g., thiazides) that reduce urate excretion
    
    Open full size imageFigure 26.47Gout. (A) Joint aspirate from acute gout arthritis demonstrates polarizable needle shape urate crystals in neutrophils. (B) Gouty tophus—an aggregate of dissolved urate crystals is surrounded by reactive fibroblasts, mononuclear inflammatory cells, and giant cells. (C) Needle-shaped urate crystals are easily identified under polarized light.
    
    
<div class="transclusion internal-embed is-loaded"><div class="markdown-embed">





# Untitled

Created: August 28, 2022 9:50 PM
Updated: August 28, 2022 9:50 PM

</div></div>

    

**MORPHOLOGY**

The distinctive patterns of gout are (1) acute arthritis, (2) chronic tophaceous arthritis, (3) accumulation of tophi in extraarticular sites, and (4) urate (gouty) nephropathy.

**Acute arthritis** is characterized by a dense neutrophilic infiltrate that permeates the synovium and synovial fluid. Slender, needle-shaped urate crystals are arranged in small clusters in the synovium and are frequently found in the cytoplasm of neutrophils within aspirated joint fluid ( [Fig. 26.47A](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0250) ). The edematous and congested synovium also contains scattered lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages. The acute attack remits when the episode of crystallization abates and crystals are solubilized.

**Chronic tophaceous arthritis** evolves from repetitive precipitation of urate crystals during acute attacks. Urate encrusts the articular surface and forms visible deposits in the synovium, which becomes hyperplastic, fibrotic, and thickened by inflammatory cells. The resulting pannus destroys the underlying cartilage and leads to juxta-articular bone erosions. In severe cases, fibrous or bony ankylosis ensues, resulting in loss of joint function.

**Tophi** are the pathognomonic hallmark of gout. They are formed by large aggregations of urate crystals surrounded by an intense inflammatory reaction of foreign-body giant cells. ( [Fig. 26.47B–C](https://www-clinicalkey-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/f0250) ). Tophi may appear in the articular cartilage, ligaments, tendons, and bursae. Less frequently they occur in soft tissues (earlobes, fingertips) or kidneys. Superficial tophi can ulcerate through the overlying skin.

**Urate nephropathy** refers to the renal complications caused by urate crystals or tophi in the renal medullary interstitium or tubules. Complications include uric acid nephrolithiasis and pyelonephritis, particularly when urinary obstruction occurs.

## Clinical Features

Primary gout initially presents as acute arthritis with sudden-onset, excruciating joint pain, localized hyperemia and warmth, and, occasionally, mild fever; constitutional symptoms are uncommon. Most first attacks are monoarticular, and 50% occur in the first metatarsophalangeal joint of the big toe. Untreated, acute gouty arthritis may last for hours to weeks, but gradually there is complete resolution followed by a symptom-free interval, known as the intercritical period. Some individuals never have another attack, but most experience a second acute episode within months to a few years. In the absence of appropriate therapy, the attacks recur at shorter intervals and frequently become polyarticular, involving other parts of the foot and less commonly the upper extremity. Chronic tophaceous gout develops about 10 years after the initial acute attack and is characterized by juxta-articular bone erosion caused by osteoclastic bone resorption and loss of the joint space.

Nonpharmacologic treatments for gout include lifestyle modifications, such as weight loss in obese individuals; dietary changes to reduce purine intake, particularly of animal and seafood proteins; reduced alcohol and sugar-sweetened beverage consumption; and regular exercise. Pharmacologic therapies include uricosuric drugs (e.g., probenecid), xanthine oxidase inhibitors (e.g., allopurinol), urate oxidases (uricases), NSAIDs, and colchicine. Finally, gout can be precipitated by serum urate–increasing drugs taken for comorbidities; their replacement with alternatives may be helpful. Generally, gout does not shorten the life span, but it does impact quality of life.