---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/jethro-s-working-notes/absorption-of-long-chain-fatty-acids/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


# Absorption of long chain fatty acids

Created: September 15, 2022 1:58 PM
Tags: GIS, Medicine, Physiology
Updated: November 30, 2022 4:10 PM

### Absorption of long chain fatty acids

**Micelle formation and micellular transport of lipid products to enterocytes**

Long chain fatty acids, monoglycerides, cholesterol associate with bile salts to form micelles (structure of micelles).

Micelles carry the lipid core across the unstirred water layer on the intestinal brush borders and approach the luminal surface of the enterocytes.

**Uptake of lipid products**

An acidic environment generated by NHE on apical membrane of enterocyte ([[Absorption of luminal oligopeptides and amino acids into enterocytes occur via different mechanisms\|Absorption of luminal oligopeptides and amino acids into enterocytes occur via different mechanisms]]), which enables the fatty acids in the micelles to become protonated and leave the micelles to enter the enterocytes.

Glycerol, and free cholesterol also leave the micelles to enter the enterocytes.

**Chylomicron formation**

Free fatty acids and monoglycerides reassemble into triglycerides in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of the enterocytes.

The triglycerides (as well as other lipids) associate with apolipoproteins to form chylomicrons in the Golgi apparatus.

Chylomicrons formed in the Golgi apparatus are budded off in vesicles and move to the basolateral membrane of enterocytes.

**Exocytosis**

Fusion of vesicles with basolateral membrane of the enterocytes results in the exocytosis of chylomicrons, which enter the lacteal.