---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/jethro-s-working-notes/artificial-intelligence-in-healthcare-and-its-ethi/","dgPassFrontmatter":true}
---


# Artificial intelligence in healthcare and its ethical concerns

Created: November 28, 2022 2:03 PM
Tags: AI, MEL, Medicine
Updated: November 28, 2022 2:27 PM

### Artificial intelligence in healthcare

[[Jethro’s Working Notes/Artificial intelligence\|Artificial intelligence]] can be applied in healthcare, mainly in terms of diagnostics.

### Ethical concerns of artificial intelligence

Using [[Jethro’s Working Notes/Principlism\|Principlism]], there are certain ethical concerns of the application of AI in healthcare.

- ****************Autonomy****************
    
    ********************************Informed consent********************************
    
    AI requires the use of data, and an informed consent must be acquired for the use of data. The problem is, that one must be able to understand how AI works (sufficient information) to give an informed consent.
    
    **************************************Physician authority**************************************
    
    Physicians may be subjected to automation bias, the bias to favour suggestions by the AI decision making system, even when they thought otherwise. 
    
    This involves diminished free will in decision making, undermining clinical authority.
    
    Furthermore, it is difficult for physicians to endorse treatment recommendation generated by an algorithm if they can’t explain the rationale.
    
    ************************************************************Consent to extraneous data use************************************************************
    
    Data used to train the AI model may have extraneous use (e.g. surveillance), where participants may not consent to.
    
- ******************************Non-maleficence******************************
    
    ************************************************************Data security and exploitation************************************************************
    
    Data may leak out through hacking, cyber attacks or covert data sales, which would invade ones privacy.
    
    ****************************AI limitations****************************
    
    Manipulation of data (malicious or otherwise) could fool an AI system, causing misdiagnosis or overdiagnosis.
    
    Furthermore, when applied to a different population, AI systems will fail. The AI system is only as good as the training data set.
    
- **************Justice**************
    
    ************************************************************Accountability for AI mistakes************************************************************
    
    Who is accountable to the mistakes made by the system? The manufacturer? The physician?
    
    **************************************************************Change in health care behaviors**************************************************************
    
    Commercialisation of AI-driven diagnostics may cause a change in health-seeking behaviors. Patients may no longer seek physicians for healthcare.